# Cancer Factors at the United States and New York State Level

*This project was created as part of a data discovery exercise for academic purposes, using a dataset provided through a course. All data, scenarios, and findings presented are fictional and were developed to demonstrate analytical skills, 
data visualization techniques, and problem-solving approaches. Any resemblance to real-life data or events is purely coincidental. 
This project is not affiliated with Rochester Regional Health, though their hospital locations were used solely for demonstrative purposes.

[View Cancer Factors at the United States and New York Stae Level on Tableau Public](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/chelsea.heimiller/viz/CancerFactorsandtheUnitedStatesandNewYorkStateLevel/CancerFactorsattheUnitedStatesandNewYorkStateLevel)


There are many factors that can provide insight into cancer incidence rates in an area. Using the cancer deaths dataset provided by the American Cancer Society, factors such as death due to cancer rates, median income, poverty percentage, and recent trends have been investigated at the country and New York State level to determine areas for Rochester Regional Health to focus on to improve health outcomes. This dataset contains both data from the year of 2015 and trend data for the years of 2009-2013. 
Summary of United States
To investigate factors at the country level, the states were divided into regions (Appendix A). Cancer incidences were investigated using a map that shows that New York, Texas, California, and Pennsylvania have the highest number of cancer incidences in 2015 at the state level. All regions show that majority of the area within the identified region has stable cancer levels but the Midwest and Southeast have the highest number of cancer incidences. While it is not a perfect relationship, for the most part as median income goes down poverty percent goes up. Median income is highest in the Northeast and lowest in the Southeast. 
There appears to be a relationship between study counts and cancer incidences with more studies happening in California, New York, Illinois, Ohio, and Texas. This could potentially be explained due to the high number of research universities and hospitals in these areas. These states are also those that have higher cancer incidences. It cannot be determined that studies are more likely to exist in areas with higher incidences or if people who live in areas with studies have better access to cancer screenings leading to higher cancer incidences. It is also possible that people with cancer are moving to areas with studies to receive treatment they may otherwise not have access to. When the states are separated into regions, the Midwest and the West have the highest study counts. 
In terms of trends, there are two different trends regarding cancer incidence numbers that are available. One is the average five-year trend of cancer incidences between 2009 and 2013 which shows that except for South Dakota all states are showing a reduction in cancer incidences over five years with the Southeast showing the biggest decrease in cancer incidences. The second five-year trend available is the average annual count of cancer incidences which is highest in California. The West has the highest average of cancer incidences with Southeast having the second lowest which is in line with the Southeast having the largest reduction in cancer incidences. Death rates are the highest in the Midwest and Southeast. Both of which are areas with higher study counts, lower median incomes, and higher poverty percentages.
Summary of New York State
At the state level, the counties with the highest level of cancer incidences are Suffolk County, Erie County, Nassau County, and Westchester County. Except for Erie County, the rest of the counties are in the downstate region. When the downstate region is removed, Erie, Ulster, Sullivan, and Oneida Counties stand out as having higher cancer incidences when compared to the rest of the state. Generally, the downstate region stands out among all factors. Counties with higher cancer incidence rates either have a cluster of hospitals or are adjacent to a county with a cluster of hospitals. While a hospital is not indicative of the availability of outpatient clinics, generally access to a hospital means access to a higher level of care. Rochester Regional Health does not have a hospital in any of counties identified as having the highest cancer incidence rates however Monroe County and St. Lawrence County fall along the middle of the cancer incidence rates. 
The median income is highest in the downstate region. Since this area also has the highest number of cancer incidences when compared to the rest of the state it is possible that median income is not a factor that contributes to cancer incidence rates in the downstate region. Additionally, median income does not take into account cost of living which is higher in the downstate area. The higher median income could also mean better access to healthcare that detects cancer. Additionally, this area also appears to have lower poverty percentage rates. When the downstate region is removed the higher median incomes and lower poverty percentages are clustered towards the southeast part of the state. The remainder of the state shows lower than average median income and higher poverty percentage rates most prominently in the Southern Tier and Montgomery, Franklin, and St. Lawrence County. Rochester Regional Health should consider focusing on these areas for increased cancer screening to determine if the lower incidences are due to lack of access to cancer screening. 
The highest number of study counts is in the downstate region where there is also a cluster of hospitals and National Cancer Institutes. For the most part, a county with a study also has a hospital present but it does not appear that having a hospital means that a study will be present. Rochester Regional is present in five counties and three of these counties have studies. The highest number of study counts is in the downstate region. There is also a cluster of hospitals and National Cancer Institutes in this area as well. For the most part, a county with a study also has a hospital present but it does not appear that having a hospital means that a study will be present. Rochester Regional is present in five counties and three of these counties have studies. The opportunities here for Rochester Regional Health include adding studies in Genesee and Wayne County where hospitals are already maintained but there are no studies. Another opportunity is to add studies in St. Lawrence County where Rochester Regional Health has three hospitals but only one study happening at the time of data collection. 
Majority of the state has seen a decline in average trend of cancer incidences between 2009-2013. The exceptions are primarily in the Western and Southern Tier regions of New York State. The average annual count of cancer incidences by county between 2009-2013 is consistent with what is seen in the 2015 cancer incidence rate with the downstate have the highest cancer incidences when compared to the rest of the state. The average deaths per year by county 2009-2013 shows that most of the deaths from cancer occurred in the downstate region which aligns with this area having a higher cancer incidence rate. When the downstate region is removed, Erie County stands out as having higher death rate than the rest of the state followed by Monroe County. Since Erie County has the highest cancer incidences outside of the downstate region, having a higher number of deaths due to cancer aligns with what would be expected. 
Overall, two regions stand out in New York State: the downstate region and Erie County both of which serve residents in the surrounding counties as well. Since New York City is the largest city in New York it is reasonable to expect that this area would stand out among pretty much all features. Buffalo is the second largest city in New York and is located in Erie County where there is an increase in number of hospitals present as well as Roswell Cancer Institute which is an NCI designated cancer institute. It is reasonable to expect that the financial factors in these areas would benefit from the increase in healthcare jobs and that cancer incidences would be more likely to be identified due to increased access to care which would impact all cancer factors. 
Recommendations for Rochester Regional Health
Rochester Regional Health can work to open new locations in areas without hospital access to increase access to cancer screening. This may identify that these areas with metrics such as lower median income, lower death rates, and higher poverty percentage may have lower cancer incidences due to lack of access to healthcare. In other words, cancer may not be identified and if it is, it may not be identified early enough to treat. Rochester Regional Health should also increase studies in these areas to monitor how increasing access to healthcare effects cancer incidences. Rochester Regional should consider capitalizing on the locations they currently have by increasing studies that are occurring in those areas and investing in infrastructure to improve cancer treatment to reduce the death rate. Additionally, there is only one cancer center recognized by the National Cancer Institute in the Western New York Region. While University of Rochester Medical Center has the Wilmot Cancer Institute, it is not recognized by the National Cancer Institute. Rochester Regional can work to get its cancer institute, Lipson Cancer Center, recognized to ensure that it becomes the go-to place for cancer treatment in the Finger Lakes Region. This will also increase the ability for Rochester Regional Health to perform studies and provide care. 
Some further factors that can be investigated throughout the state include number of cancer screenings, tobacco, and alcohol usage. This data was not readily available on the New York State Department of Health website in a format that was usable with the cancer deaths dataset. A few potential options that were identified include the Adult Tobacco Survey: 2003 to 2019 dataset as well as the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey dataset. The issues with these datasets included being available in a format not compatible with tableau, not having data available outside of New York City at the county level, and requiring clinical interpretation outside of the skillset of this writer. Additionally, both datasets were dependent on people self-reporting. A better option for these factors would be an electronic health record (EHR) dataset. Rochester Regional Health should investigate the dataset available within its EHR to locate risk factor patterns within its area of service.
Solution Creation and Challenges
To create a solution to this problem, the cancer deaths dataset was used in conjunction with a list of hospitals obtained from New York State Department of Health and a list of National Cancer Institutes recognized cancer centers. First, trends were identified at the regional level by dividing the states up and looking at cancer incidences, median income, poverty percent, and other factors to build a picture of the country. Then the identification of trends at the county level in New York State were explored. 
A challenge I initially experienced was attempting to get three unrelated data sources to appear on the same map. There was not a way to tie them together using relational methods. By using layers hospital locations within New York State were able to be laid over data from the cancer deaths dataset to explore potential access to care in different areas of the state and how this access may impact access to healthcare. Another challenge I had within the New York State specific section was removing the downstate region since it skews the data for the entire state. At first, I added a filter using county name but I either had to figure out which counties were in New York State and specifically select them to be added to the interactive filter or have all counties from all states included. This increased the number of choices available and required more effort than necessary to remove an undesired county. This was resolved by creating a set that contained only records that were associated with New York State. Another challenge was finding outside data within the timeframe of this dataset as the five-year trends look at 2009-2013 and it appears the dataset is from 2015. This means that including any additional data from external sources requires finding data from the same time period which is becoming harder to find as datasets are updated. 
While not a challenge I had to think carefully about aggregating variables in a way that made sense for the variable and the grouping I was trying to show. For example, median income of the state should be the median of all the income values of all the records belonging to a state and not the sum of all median incomes. In contrast, when calculating cancer incidences for a state you would want to sum the cancer incidences for all records in a state. One that I found particularly interesting to think about was average deaths per year. To get a full picture of this variable at an aggregate level all values for the grouping (ex: state) must be summed even though first instinct may be to average it. Averaging the average deaths per year would give an artificially low number because the average of the average would be taken. Summing the averages together instead gives you a full picture of the area being looked at.

References
Cancer Center List. Cancer center list - OCCWEBAPP 2.2. (2023). https://cancercenters.cancer.gov/Center/CCList 
New York State Department of Health. (2023, April 27). NYSDOH_Hopsital_Profile. https://health.data.ny.gov/Health/Hospital-Profile/7a62-tptu

Appendix A




